---
layout: post
title: "Relucantly Remote, and loving it"
date: 2020-03-24
description: How I learned to stop worrying and love remote work.
cover_image: /assets/images/remote-work.webp
author: Dmytri Kleiner
tags:
  - Remote
  - Agile
  - Team Work
  - Collaboration
  - Real Time
---

I have to admit, most of my career I've treated remote collaboration as a
necessary evil.

I'm a big fan of colocation. I love sticky notes, magic charts and colourful
tape. I love walls so much whenever I see pictures hanging on them I'm like,
why are they wasting good wall space for those useless pictures? I love pair
and mob programming. I love highly engaged, participant centered workshops. I
love retrospectives, and I do elaborate ones featuring lots of pair and group
conversation, arts and crafts, and role playing.

For years I've lived this way, preaching customer and partner interaction,
NIHITO, user observation, face to face collaboration and working together
shoulder to shoulder.

Then, the first shoe dropped, I joined an early stage startup building the
knowledge collaboration database of the future, TerminusDB. 

Suddenly, I had a distributed team, half of the engineers are in Utrecht, half
of the engineers, along with the business team are in Dublin, a developer
relations person in London, and me in Berlin.

So, I started making everyone fly around, we had workshops and colocated work
in the Netherlands, and in Ireland, we started to develop our flow of design
and delivery practices.

The idea was that we would do design and planning in person, on walls with
stickies and stuff, then convert these to digital representations and do
delivery work back home, but try to divide systems such that related work could
be done by workcenters which are mostly colocated. So, core database
development in Utrecht and web platform work in Dublin.

This meant our CTO would basically commute from Dublin to Utrecht, and our
DevRel person would basically commute from London to Dublin, and I would also
be traveling continuously. But hey, that's been more or less what I've been
used to for basically forever, and this is the framework that I've been
recommending to teams for a long time.

We chose Trello as our online kanban, and where already using Slack and Github,
plus Google Apps and Zoom. So, we were somewhat remote already, but not really.

Realizing that it would be cool if we could find ways to do some of the design
and planning work online, as there would never be enough time to do all of it
in person, I started investigating online collaboration tools, and having
conversations with colleagues about best tools and practices.

Then, the other shoe dropped. A worldwide pandemic. Everyone is working from
home. Travel is not an option, and our customers can not be visited.

Now what?

Day one we left our physical offices in Dublin and Utrecht, and moved into our
new virtual office: Discord.

[Discord](https://discordapp.com) is a platform for gamers to play online games
together, it provides text chat channels, like Slack, but also voice channels
which are like meeting rooms that people can have voice meetings in.

The ability to have different channels for teams as well as for company
meetings, and the ability to quickly see that people are in a given voice
channel, provides for a much more ad-hoc experience, you can see when and where
people are meeting, drop in and say hi, or notice meetings are happening when
maybe you didn't notice in your calendar.

This feels much more like an office experience than scheduled video
conferences, and allows for more casual interactions with less friction in
jumping on voice chats. It's not quite colocation, but it's not a bad
facsimile.

Discord also allows a user to go live and share their screen, this was designed
for streaming the game you are playing so that others can watch you play. It
also works well for pair and mob programming and presentations.

If anything, moving to Discord has  actually increased  the time we spend
paring and mobbing. Something we're very happy about, not to mention the
reduced air miles.

We are writing more code with greater quality, spending less money, emitting
less carbon, and abiding by needed social distancing practices during the
pandemic. Other than perhaps worsening the teams personal hygiene and
fashionability, this has been a real improvement, and a practice we will
continue even when the pandemic is behind us.

So far so good, however, pairing and mobbing and presentations are great for
the delivery portion of our workflow, but there is still the question of design
and planning. While I had begun my investigations in earnest, now we're all in.
It's go remote or go home! No wait.  It's stay home or no go! Go live or die
trying? Something like that.

The question is how do I facilitate agile design and planning practices when I
can't see everyone, when I can't get them to write sticky notes, and I don't
have a wall to stick them on.

So far, I've not really been a big fan of any of the online tools I've tried.
They are either too fiddly, requiring the mouse ninja skills of a master
Photoshop jockey, or too limited, implementing a very rigid version of popular
practices and not allowing you to paint outside the lines or vary the practice
when the situation calls for it. They make it hard or impossible to combine
practices or invent new ones, as I am wont to do. Or, the system is so
complicate, that finding a setting or feature is  like needing to explore 17
levels of a 70s style text adventure, without being eaten by a Grue, only not
nearly as fun.

Good luck facilitating an online session when you need to start with an hour
long introduction to the tools, and let's put aside the issues of ill-fitting
pricing models for now.

In the end, after trying every tool available online and putting myself at risk
of repetitive strain injury just from the amount of "Hi, I'm Bill from Customer
Success" emails I will need to unsubscribe from , some hope is emerging.

With Discord as our virtual office, and with everybody getting used to voice
channels as opposed to video conferences, this leaves our eyes free to focus on
real time collaboration tools instead of video. While screen sharing and video
are very useful tools, for working sessions like planning and design workshops
they are better avoided.

Instead of video or screen sharing,  real time collaboration tools allow
everyone to work together at the same time within the collaboration app, so
nobody is sharing their screen, everyone is using the same software at the same
time and seeing the same state.

The first tool we added was [Lucid Meetings](https://lucidmeetings.com). Lucid
is not a conferencing tool, we use Discord voice channels to talk during
meetings.

Lucid is a real time meeting tool that allows you to create an agenda, and step
through it together with everyone at the same time. During the meeting,
everyone sees the current agenda item being discussed.

This is super important if you will also be use other tools during the meeting,
as you can provide links and instructions in the agenda. One of the biggest
challenges is keeping a group of remote people in sync.  A real time agenda
tool like Lucid is really helpful for this.

Lucid also has a chat interface, allows everyone to write notes, add action
items and other records, which are not only emailed to everyone after the
meeting, but also kept in lucid and available for review at future meetings.

There is also a speaker queue, document attachments and other features required
for  facilitating meetings and recording outcomes. Lucid is built by meeting
experts, includes templates and facilitator guides for common meeting types,
and has a friendly and very helpful community.

So, now that I can plan the session and keep everyone on the same page, the
next, and trickiest bit is visual collaboration, how do I replace creating
simple canvases with tape and sticky notes? Although honorable mention goes to
[MetroRetro](https://metroretro.io) and [Miro](https://miro.com), both very
cool tools, our team chose [Mural](https://mural.co). Not sure why all these
tools start with an M. Maybe it's like a secret coded message of some kind.

Mural is a real time visual collaboration tool that allows people to draw on a
canvas at the same time, add sticky notes, shapes and pictures. What sets it
apart are it's "Facilitator Superpowers."

Facilitators can build outlines, that define parts of a canvas or steps in a
practice, and then "summon" participants so that they are all looking at the
same part of the canvas at the same time, and hide and reveal portions of the
canvas as required to advance the practice. It also has plenty of popular
templates and frameworks for popular practices, but makes it easy to combine
them and make your own templates. It also has a timer, and a voting feature.

I've successfully created templates for my own practices with it and used them
to run remote meetings.

So, while our journey into remote design and planning practices is just
beginning, and many challenges remain, Discord, Lucid Meetings and Mural give
us a pretty solid base to build on.

But, OK, I confess "loving it" was an exaggeration, I still miss working face
to face, but we're coping and even when the pandemic is over, I'm sure that
remote work and the practices we are developing will remain a key part of our
way of working.

